readme.md, before:

## Communication Design: Creative Computing
Parsons The New School for Design

Fall 2014  
PUCD 2035 D  
Friday, 9:00am - 11:40am  
Arnold Hall, 55 W 13th St., Room 402

Jonathan Dahan | dehanj@newschool.edu

### Description

This course will introduce students to the building blocks of creative computing within the visual and media environment. Students will learn to create dynamic images, type and interfaces, that can translate into print, web and spatial forms. Through weekly problems, students will learn programming fundamentals that translate in virtually all programming platforms.

By the end of this class students should feel excitement (as opposed to dread) when encountering new programming languags, techniques, and technologies. They will know how to quickly find and participate in each community to help them learn. Students will have to learn how to feel comfortable working with the unfamiliar. In doing so, encounters with new technology can be seen as an opportunity to expand the breadth and depth of their craft, and as inspiration for new work.

### Learning Outcomes

* Demonstrate knowledge of fundamental programming concepts
* Develop several visual & interactive projects
* Objectively present their design process and workflow
* Integrate a variety of media elements into their projects
* Problem solve with other students through reading other students’ code
* Demonstrate the ability to research and learn unfamiliar technical topics

### Required Materials, Software, etc.

+ A functioning and fully charged **laptop running OSX or linux**. Please bring this laptop to every class session.
+ Student space on the School’s webserver.
+ A text editor that supports syntax highlighting, such as [atom](atom.io) or [sublime text](sublimetext.com).
+ A modern web browser, such as [Mozilla Firefox](firefox.org) or [Google Chrome](google.com/chrome).
+ Readings and viewings will be made available online.

### Attendance

Per New School policy, 3 or more absences or excessive tardiness will result in a failing grade. If you need to miss class, please email me in advance.

### Projects and Excercises

Each week there will be a small exercises to help reinforce the ideas introduced in class. In addition, there will be three more open ended assignments, that will take more time to complete. There will be one final personal project, that can be started anytime during the course. Grades are broken down as follows

**20%** attendance and participation,
**40%** exercises,
**20%** assignments,
**20%** final project

### Topics

We will cover at least the following topics in depth:

- Networks
- Numbers
- The Terminal
- Hardware
- Interfaces
- APIs
- Operating Systems

An sample of interesting projects and artwork to act as inspiration for the assignments.
The exercises will help ensure working knowledge to incorporate these elements in future work.

Depending on the character and interests of the class, we can cover additional topics such as security, embedded systems, functional programming, node-based programming, wireless communication, bitcoin and the blockchain, bittorrent.

### Exercises

Possible exercises

- Watch [Robert Hodgins' Keynote]()
- Contribute to a github repository
  - contribute to a project with at least 15 stars on github?
- Add an element of interactivity to an existing website
- make bash script with at least 3
- programming metaphors
- use ifttt to make a new application
- Read the first 3 chapters of [Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Software](http://www.amazon.com/Code-Language-Computer-Hardware-Software/dp/0735611319)

### Course Outline

#### `0x00` Hello, Human

**Assignment** Create a program designed to be executed by a human  
**Motivation** Language design, machine empathy, common elements  
**Inspiration** Sol LeWitt  
**Excercise** Sign up for github, file an issue for the class

For the first assignment we will have to write a program designed to be executed by a human. You can write this in any language, but the final output must be created only by handing a person a sheet of paper. We will review our experiences after 30 minutes, discussing what programming concepts we have discovered. The final version of this assignment will be due in 2 weeks.

Syllabus Overview (30 minutes)
Program a friend explanation (15 minutes)
Programming (45 minutes)
 - My [sample program](0x01_human_program.md)
 - Cool [student](http://instagram.com/p/sSU-5zRxA0/) [programs](http://instagram.com/p/sSVD-uRxA7/)
Discussion of basic concepts (30 minutes)
 - We identified variables, and loops.
 - We talked about compilers, and operating systems.
What are your questions about technology? (30 minutes)
 - Here is [the list of questions we came up with](https://github.com/jedahan/pucd2035d/blob/master/questions.md)

#### `0x01` Computer Empathy

Intro to languages and javascript.

**Exercise** Deface a website using jquery $.text and $.attr
**Inspiration** _why's poignant guide to ruby
**Motivation** Look at websites as raw materials

Defacements have been posted to github.

#### `0x02` What is data? What is code?

Learn about binary numbers, and other data types.

**motivation** Introduction to how operating systems work  
**inspiration** Raphael Hemmer

#### `0x03` The filesystem and commandline

**motivation**: quick prototypes, reuse of tools, composability, imperative programming  
**inspiration** cat /dev/urandom > /dev/{dsp,fb0}, hex edit a file  
The command line

CLI tools and how to use pipes pipes  
Navigation of the filesystem and how to read documentation  

Show commandlinefu, stack overflow, manpages  

#### `0x04` Lets make circles!

Introduction to p5.js, and servers   
What is html/css/javascript? How can we draw with javascript?  
What is a server? We run our own servers.  

#### `0x05` Crazier data circles

Drawings into interaction  
Turn our javascript sketches into full blown interactives  

#### `0x06` Networked circles!

Revisit data types, and connect data to visualisations  

#### `0x07` Networks and Communication

Learn how APIs work, and continued use to create new work.  

### `0x08` Glitches

**Inspiration** Girl talk, ART404  

Software as tools for reappropriation  

#### Class `0x09`

#### Class `0x0A`

#### Class `0x0B`

#### Class `0x0C`

```python
while(! self.sleeping()):
  eat(turkey || tofurkey)
```

### Class `0x0D`

### Class `0x0E`

Commit message:

move supplementary exercises to bottom

readme.md, after:

## Communication Design: Creative Computing
Parsons The New School for Design

Fall 2014  
PUCD 2035 D  
Friday, 9:00am - 11:40am  
Arnold Hall, 55 W 13th St., Room 402

Jonathan Dahan | dehanj@newschool.edu

### Description

This course will introduce students to the building blocks of creative computing within the visual and media environment. Students will learn to create dynamic images, type and interfaces, that can translate into print, web and spatial forms. Through weekly problems, students will learn programming fundamentals that translate in virtually all programming platforms.

By the end of this class students should feel excitement (as opposed to dread) when encountering new programming languags, techniques, and technologies. They will know how to quickly find and participate in each community to help them learn. Students will have to learn how to feel comfortable working with the unfamiliar. In doing so, encounters with new technology can be seen as an opportunity to expand the breadth and depth of their craft, and as inspiration for new work.

### Learning Outcomes

* Demonstrate knowledge of fundamental programming concepts
* Develop several visual & interactive projects
* Objectively present their design process and workflow
* Integrate a variety of media elements into their projects
* Problem solve with other students through reading other students’ code
* Demonstrate the ability to research and learn unfamiliar technical topics

### Required Materials, Software, etc.

+ A functioning and fully charged **laptop running OSX or linux**. Please bring this laptop to every class session.
+ Student space on the School’s webserver.
+ A text editor that supports syntax highlighting, such as [atom](atom.io) or [sublime text](sublimetext.com).
+ A modern web browser, such as [Mozilla Firefox](firefox.org) or [Google Chrome](google.com/chrome).
+ Readings and viewings will be made available online.

### Attendance

Per New School policy, 3 or more absences or excessive tardiness will result in a failing grade. If you need to miss class, please email me in advance.

### Projects and Excercises

Each week there will be a small exercises to help reinforce the ideas introduced in class. In addition, there will be three more open ended assignments, that will take more time to complete. There will be one final personal project, that can be started anytime during the course. Grades are broken down as follows

**20%** attendance and participation,
**40%** exercises,
**20%** assignments,
**20%** final project

### Topics

We will cover at least the following topics in depth:

- Networks
- Numbers
- The Terminal
- Hardware
- Interfaces
- APIs
- Operating Systems

An sample of interesting projects and artwork to act as inspiration for the assignments.
The exercises will help ensure working knowledge to incorporate these elements in future work.

Depending on the character and interests of the class, we can cover additional topics such as security, embedded systems, functional programming, node-based programming, wireless communication, bitcoin and the blockchain, bittorrent.

### Course Outline

#### `0x00` Hello, Human

**Assignment** Create a program designed to be executed by a human  
**Motivation** Language design, machine empathy, common elements  
**Inspiration** Sol LeWitt  
**Excercise** Sign up for github, file an issue for the class

For the first assignment we will have to write a program designed to be executed by a human. You can write this in any language, but the final output must be created only by handing a person a sheet of paper. We will review our experiences after 30 minutes, discussing what programming concepts we have discovered. The final version of this assignment will be due in 2 weeks.

Syllabus Overview (30 minutes)
Program a friend explanation (15 minutes)
Programming (45 minutes)
 - My [sample program](0x01_human_program.md)
 - Cool [student](http://instagram.com/p/sSU-5zRxA0/) [programs](http://instagram.com/p/sSVD-uRxA7/)
Discussion of basic concepts (30 minutes)
 - We identified variables, and loops.
 - We talked about compilers, and operating systems.
What are your questions about technology? (30 minutes)
 - Here is [the list of questions we came up with](https://github.com/jedahan/pucd2035d/blob/master/questions.md)

#### `0x01` Computer Empathy

Intro to languages and javascript.

**Exercise** Deface a website using jquery $.text and $.attr
**Inspiration** _why's poignant guide to ruby
**Motivation** Look at websites as raw materials

Defacements have been posted to github.

#### `0x02` What is data? What is code?

Learn about binary numbers, and other data types.

**motivation** Introduction to how operating systems work  
**inspiration** Raphael Hemmer

#### `0x03` The filesystem and commandline

**motivation**: quick prototypes, reuse of tools, composability, imperative programming  
**inspiration** cat /dev/urandom > /dev/{dsp,fb0}, hex edit a file  
The command line

CLI tools and how to use pipes pipes  
Navigation of the filesystem and how to read documentation  

Show commandlinefu, stack overflow, manpages  

#### `0x04` Lets make circles!

Introduction to p5.js, and servers   
What is html/css/javascript? How can we draw with javascript?  
What is a server? We run our own servers.  

#### `0x05` Crazier data circles

Drawings into interaction  
Turn our javascript sketches into full blown interactives  

#### `0x06` Networked circles!

Revisit data types, and connect data to visualisations  

#### `0x07` Networks and Communication

Learn how APIs work, and continued use to create new work.  

### `0x08` Glitches

**Inspiration** Girl talk, ART404  

Software as tools for reappropriation  

#### Class `0x09`

#### Class `0x0A`

#### Class `0x0B`

#### Class `0x0C`

```python
while(! self.sleeping()):
  eat(turkey || tofurkey)
```

### Class `0x0D`

### Class `0x0E`

## Supplementary Excercises

- Watch Robert Hodgins' Keynote
- make bash script with at least 3 other programs
- programming metaphors
- use ifttt to make a new application
- Read the first 3 chapters of Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Softwar
